Mary kept listening to what Jesus was saying.
How commendable.
She said the right priorities
and is a good example for us.
Martha, her sister, however,
received loving correction from Jesus
as our printed comment puts it.
Now, let us today put ourselves
in the shoes of Martha for a moment.
She showed great interest in supporting Jesus
by providing him a base during his ministry
in the difficult area of Judea.
Now, this time, Mary and Martha were probably working together
to prepare things for Jesus.
But after Jesus arrived, Mary stopped helping
as our text indicates.
How did Martha feel about it?
Now, she had to care for everything herself.
Can we imagine the tension rising
within Martha's heart,
the stress level increased,
and her dear sister sits and listens to Jesus.
So she asked Jesus to correct Mary
to order her back to work.
But to her surprise, she, Martha,
received counsel from Jesus.
How would we feel in such a situation?
We are doing something well-intentioned
and yet instead of commendation, we receive counsel.
Maybe our eyes fill with tears.
We feel the pain on our chest.
We might think we can't breathe anymore.
And did Martha think for a moment
replying to Jesus saying,
this is not fair.
I am doing everything to support you.
And now this, you know, from now on,
I am listening to and I'm curious to find out
who prepares the meals for you.
Of course, we don't know what Martha thought and said.
But what we do know, as our printed comment puts it,
she took to heart Jesus' loving correction.
What can help us to overcome such a painful moment
and to progress?
The term often used in this connection is resilience.
People who are resilient are able to recover easily
and quickly from unpleasant and damaging events.
It is like the ability of this piece of metal
to tolerate pressure and get back to its original form.
Let us therefore look at three factors
that make us resilient and different
from those who easily give up and surrender.
Now, the first factor is facing reality.
Facing reality.
Let us please open to Proverbs chapter 28.
The question we are asking ourselves
in a difficult moment is,
do I truly understand and accept the reality of my situation?
Here in Proverbs 28 verse 26, it starts by saying,
whoever trusts in his own heart is stupid.
We might tend to put on emotional blinders
and see only what we want to see.
Many people slip into denial as a coping mechanism.
However, the Proverbs continues in the second part
by saying what the one who walks in wisdom will escape.
This means seeing the things the way they are.
Facing reality.
Really, facing reality is a grueling work.
Indeed, it can be unpleasant
and often emotionally branching.
The Apostle Peter had this experience
when Jesus looked at him after Peter denied him three times.
Peter faced reality.
He went outside, broke down, wept bitterly.
For sure, he was not looking for any excuses.
This experience as well as other situations
where he received counsel helped him to make progress
and to fulfill his assignments even better.
Now, what is the second factor?
We call it meaning making.
We might know people who under pressure
throw up their hands and cry and say,
why can this happening to me?
Such people see themselves as victims
and living through hardship does not teach them any lessons.
We, however, based on our Bible knowledge,
understand why difficulties and challenging situations
are sometimes unavoidable.
Seeing the bigger picture adds meaning.
This helps us as a resilient person
not only to endure an unpleasant situation
or a new circumstance,
but also to look at seeming obstacle
and see an opportunity in it.
We all know no one is perfect.
Everyone fails at something sometime.
So our choice is the manner in which we respond.
We are actively trying to make the best out of it,
looking ahead rather than behind.
Setting goals, maybe new goals.
We might remember how Brother Harold King showed
this resilient disposition
when he was in solitary confinement.
How did he give meaning to his difficult situation
by making the best out of it?
He said,
I arranged for a program of preaching activity,
but to whom does one preach when in solitary confinement?
I decided that I would build up some appropriate Bible sermons
from the things I could remember
and then preach to imaginary characters.
End of quote.
So in our context, we can say,
meaning making is like building a bridge
from present-day hardship to a better future.
By means of this bridge,
we make the difficult situation manageable.
We remove the sense that the present is overwhelming.
Now let's look at the third factor,
a balanced view of ourselves.
While we said at the beginning
that we have to face reality
which can go along with feelings of sadness and disappointment
as resilient people,
we don't take the failure
or a challenging situation personally.
Let us please open to Romans chapter seven
because we want to demonstrate this point
by the means of the example of the Apostle Paul.
At times, he felt discouraged over his weaknesses.
Here in chapter seven,
he describes the pain of conscience
that he suffered because of feeling captive to sin.
But then in verse 24,
he cries out saying,
miserable man that I am evidently though,
Paul realized that his imperfection did not define him.
Nine years later,
in his second letter to his friend Timothy,
shortly before his death,
he stated his personal conclusion of the matter.
Here in second Timothy, chapter four in verse seven,
he said,
I have fought the fine fight.
I have run the race to the finish.
I have observed the faith.
Paul's problems and inner struggle
did not miraculously disappear.
Still, it did not prevent him
from accomplishing remarkable things
in Jehovah's service.
So therefore, we do not berate ourselves
with self-defeating language such as,
I'm a failure or I'm useless.
Reflecting on positive aspects of our lives
and reflecting on our strengths helps us
to maintain a balanced view of ourselves.
So in conclusion,
the experience of Martha reminded us today
of the importance of building
and maintaining resilience
by facing reality,
meaning making,
and maintaining a balanced view of ourselves.